once around Enceladus.
So Enceladus, moon of Saturn, was
discovered by William Herschel in August
the 28th of the year 1789 using his 40
foot telescope at Observatory House near
Slough. Hershel had moved from Bath in
the west of England to be near London to
the west of London slightly near Windsor
near the king because the king was now
sponsoring him £30,000 a year which is
an enormous amount of money for the time
um to be able to be his personal
astronomer whenever the king wanted. and
the 40ft telescope. That's the length of
the telescope, not the diameter of the
mirror. Somewhat confusingly, we have a
photograph at the bottom there of the
mirror made of specular metal in the
science museum. Uh, but it was a beast
of an instrument and enabled Hershel to
do some really fantastic work. So the
name Enceladus is one of the giants of
Greek mythology and it was William's son
John Hershel who came up with the idea
in put them forward in his 1847 results
of astronomical observations made at the
Cape of Good Hope and the image on the
right there is Enceladus from Greek
mythology uh with the goddess Athena I
think.
So, first visited by the Voyager probes,
Voyager 1 and two, they flew past Saturn
in 1980 and 1981. And this image is a
Voyager 2 image from 26th of August 1981
at a distance of 87,000 km. And it's
giving us the first really detailed view
of the surface, showing that crater
covered hemisphere at the top and the
smoother hemisphere with grooves down
towards the bottom. A very diverse
surface was revealed,
but we got much better views from
Cassini. The Cassini probe went to
Saturn. It went into orbit and did many
flybys of Enceladus between 2008 and
2015. And the closest was very close
indeed, just 25 kilometers from the
surface.
Um, the image on the right here shows
Enceladus in the foreground with Saturn
in the background and the very thin line
of Saturn's rings there. I just love
that image.
In terms of its orbit, it's further out
than Mimus, further out than the bo main
body of the ring system and interior to
some of the larger moons, Tethus, Dioni,
and Ria there with Titan and other moons
further off out of shot.
A distance of 238,000 km from the center
of Saturn puts it 180,000 kilometers
from the cloud tops and it goes round in
just over a day, 33 hours.
And that is twice as fast as Dioni. It's
in a 2:1 lock with Dioni keeping its
orbit stable.
Tidal effect of Saturn's gravity of
course on these moons makes them locked
into a rotation period so that one face
is towards the planet at all times.
Size-wise 500 km and very nearly
spherical. The sizes are 513x503x497.
So not very much difference at all. And
that's 17th the size of the Earth's moon
shown on the right with the asteroid
series there at the top and Enceladus at
the lower left hand side of the picture.
Sixth largest of Saturn's moons, 10 to
the 20 kg. So getting on for five or 10
times larger than uh the neighboring
moonus and with a density that's greater
as well 1.6 g per cubic cm and that says
that there's a lot of ice but a
significant rocky core as well. Minus is
only just more dense than water. So
probably lacking in rock
temperature- wise. This very shiny coat
that you can see reflects 85% of the
light. Uh it's almost a mirror and that
uh means that uh most of the sun's heat
is reflected away. So the surface there
that you're looking at in the middle of
the day is just about - 198 nearly 200°
centigrade below freezing. So very cold
indeed, more so than most of the moons
of Saturn.
But the really exciting discovery
was this image here showing that
cratered surface to the upper right and
the cracks and grooves in detail on the
other hemisphere.
And the blue lines down at the bottom
there in this slightly color enhanced
image are called the tiger stripes. And
they are very very interesting indeed.
When we study the surface, we look at
the craters and you can see that the
craters are considerably misshapen in uh
various ways suggesting that the surface
has been mobile, somewhat plastic and
deformed due to tectonic processes going
on underneath.
Indeed, on the uh grooved and cracked
hemisphere, a detailed shot here shows
that there is definitely some sort of
pushing and shoving going on between
different regions. And it's causing
these pressure ridges and grooves, uh
the so-called process of tectonics, very
similar to what happens in the Arctic
with the sea ice. And this is all
pointing to this being a floating uh ice
covering, an ice crust floating on top
of a liquid water ocean as we seem to
find so often uh with these ice worlds.
And in this case, we're very sure
because we have seen plumes of material,
water ejected from geysers into space
and venting upwards. And of course, as
it hits the cold of space, the water
freezes very rapidly, creating snow. And
it's covered the surface of Enceladus in
a layer of water snow
several hundred meters deep. I think the
uh estimate is up to 700 m at the
deepest point. And these plumes are
revealing the contents and what lies
beneath the ice.
Cassini was able to study them by flying
through the plumes themselves. And we've
studied them spectroscopically from
Earth as well. And we've able to find
that it's mostly water
and contains nitrogen, carbon dioxide,
methane, and ammonia. Very common
materials to find in outer solar system
bodies. But also molecular hydrogen. And
whilst there's a lot of that in the
giant planets, these small bodies don't
have the gravity to hang on to hydrogen
for very long. So it would soon escape
to space. And it's out of equilibrium.
Not only physically from the point of
view of the gravity but also chemically
in that hydrogen present in the the
amount that it is along with things like
carbon dioxide
and other materials is a chemical soup
that should change. It should react and
produce other forms very rapidly.
So something is generating the hydrogen
probably chemical processes at the water
rock boundary things like serpentization
which changes the chemistry of the rocks
and can cause molecular hydrogen to be
evolved.
Now we also see organic compounds
propane three carbon atoms. Acetylene
two carbon atoms formaldihide
CH2O
and that is the
very lightest version of sugar. In fact
carbohydrates have carbon combined with
water. So C H2O
multiplied out to create uh longer more
complex sugars but the simplest is
formaldihide
um and we also finding amines and other
materials as well larger molecules
benzene C6H6 the aromatic compounds and
some with up to 15 carbon atoms have
been detected so quite a complex organic
soup
and the plumes are essentially
waterbased volcanic activity.
Warmth from inside the planet is warming
the water and that melts its way up
through the ice and is venting out to
space creating that those plumes and
snowing back down all over the surface
building up the frozen crust.
There are various models that have been
developed, very sophisticated computer
models that try to estimate the
temperature of the water. And we're
talking about the warm rock in the
center being heated by tidal effects
stretching and squeezing the moon.
Interactions with the giant planet and
the other moons. Warmth rising, melting
pockets within the ice that then uh can
vent to space. The so-called cold gazer
model.
um and other models involving a liquid
water ocean that spans almost the entire
moon and that the
um methane is being created by chemical
reactions between materials in the rock.
Olivine and water react, release
methane, and the methane can be then
bubbled to the surface through the vents
and can also be trapped by cages of
water molecules, so-called methane
clates. And we find those on the deep
ocean floor here on Earth. So, we're not
talking about something that we don't
understand very well indeed. So,
fascinating chemical processes going on
under the ice there.
And the heat, well, there definitely is
heat. This is an enhanced infrared image
of the tiger stripes where the plumes
are venting, revealing the warmth lying
underneath, coming up through these
great gashes in the surface. And it's
very very likely that this is a
combination of the tidal effects of the
stretching and squeezing of the moon um
due to its orbit around Saturn and the
interaction with the other moons and
from radioactive material that was
captured within Enceladus when it formed
in the Saturn Nebula. a sub gathering of
material orbit in orbit around the sun
perhaps trapping a very large amount of
the short-lived radioisotopes like iron
60 and aluminium 26 and so on and longer
lived materials such as potassium 40 and
uranium and so on all of which are now
still around and still decaying but the
short-lived isotopes giving a an early
boost to the internal heat content
melting it.
Now, all that material coming out from
the plumes is the source of the E-ring,
a rather diffuse outer ring in which
Enceladus orbits in the densest central
part. And this is a real picture of
Enceladus venting material and the
thicker part of the E-ring which is
actually quite uh goes quite a lot
further out gradually thinning as you
can see towards the left hand side of
the image. So it's the plumes of
material that are ejecting material from
Enceladus and that is reducing its mass.
It's losing about 200 kilon uh kilogram
per second of material out into the
E-ring.
But don't worry because if you calculate
that uh compared to its mass of 10 ^ 20
kg, it's probably lost 30% of its mass
over its entire life since the dawn of
the solar system. Uh so it'll be around
a while yet.
Now, the really interesting thing about
all this chemistry and the internals in
that liquid water ocean, the salty ocean
lying in a protected zone under the ice,
kept from freezing perhaps by a little
bit of ammonia acting as antifreeze with
that molecular hydrogen
potentially acting as fuel for
methanogen biochemistry. We see that
here on earth that certain bacteria
generate methane using hydrogen as a a
fuel source and uh can live on it quite
happily.
Formaldihide, the basis of sugars,
amines, the precursors to amino acids.
And even in 203 uh 2023, they discovered
phosphates, which completes the set of
all of the elements necessary in all the
combinations to build up complex
biomolecules
uh such as even DNA. You have all the
ingredients necessary. Um, and so could
it be that there is life under the ice
of Enceladus? And that I think is a very
good reason to be planning to send
missions out to this little moon. And
indeed, there are many in the ideas
stage and some in the early stages of
preparation. Um, too many for me to
list. It's such a popular target for
this very reason. So, thanks very much
for listening and I do hope we learn
more about Enceladus in the coming
years.